In this lesson, we're going to look at
another type of While loop, the
event-controlled loop.
The event-controlled loop looks for some
occurrence, some
event to occur to make the loop stop.
There's several different types of event
control loops.
We can't cover them all.
Later in the chapter I'm going to
introduce
you to files and working with files and
then
we'll see an event where we read a file
until we run out of data in the file.
That being the event that stops the loop.
For this particular lesson, though, I'm
going to
give you a simpler example, where we're
going
to enter grades into a program until a
certain grade, called a sentinel value, is
entered.
In this case, the sentinel will be
negative one.
So, let's get started.
We're gonna call this program
whileevent.py.
And I'll explain how the Sentinel works in
just a minute.
First, I need to set up a couple of
variables.
We're going to have an average variable, a
total variable, and a count variable.
So in other words, we're going to be
entering grades
until we get to a certain place where we
wanna stop.
We're gonna total those grades and then
divide by
the total number of grades to get a
average.
So, we prompt the user to enter a grade,
and a negative 1 to quit.
Negative 1 is our sentinel value.
Entering negative 1, is the event that
causes the loop to stop.
Then we get that grade in and we convert
it to integer, after we get it from raw
input.
Now we start our loop.
While grade is not equal to negative 1.
Take the grade and add it to the total.
Increment the count by one, so we can
keep an accurate number of grades that
we've entered.
And then prompt the user to enter a grade
again.
That's the end of our loop, so then when
we're finished we will compute the average
by dividing the total by the count, and
then we'll display the average grade.
Just like so.
So again let's look at our event the event
is entering
a negative 1 for the grade, so while a
grade is not
a negative 1, then we can continue
entering grades to figure out our
average so let's exit and save and let's
run our program.
So what we're gonna do is we're gonna
enter
a series of even values, then we'll enter
negative
1 and the average grade is 80, that's
right
of those five grades, the average is
indeed 80.
Let's write it one more time
with just a wide range of grades.
I'll just keep entering for a bit longer,
we'll do one more, so
let's bring the program back up, and let's
review what we did, we have
a loop that runs while the grade that's
entered is not negative 1,
and notice how we enter a grade initially
before we go into the loop.
I read once in a programming text that
this is called priming the pump, so that,
we're priming the pump by assigning a
grade here, and then testing it here.
And then we again enter a grade after
we've taken the current
grade added it to the total and added it
to our count.
Going back to the original description of
a while loop, we
still have an event or a statement in the
blue body that
will cause the loop to quit, and that's
this line right here,
grade is equal to int raw input, because
we enter negative 1.
When we go back to the top of the loop to
test our relational expression, grade
is indeed negative 1, so that becomes
false,
that relational expression becomes false,
and our loop stops.
So, that's how, event-controlled loops
work.
And like I said, we're going to look at
another example
later in the chapter when we talk about
processing text files.
But for now we're going to move to another
topic,
and we're going to talk about a special
statement called
continue, that allows us to skip parts of
a loop
body, and go on to the next iteration of
the loop.
After continue, in the next lesson, we'll
look at another example
called break, which allows us to exit a
loop completely prematurely.
And continue and break are not statements
that you wanna use all the time.
But there are situations where they are
needed, so we're gonna
start in the next lesson by looking at the
continue statement.